All right so in this video we're going to take a look at the binary search algorithm binary search is
pretty much the standard search algorithm but and there's a huge bat.
And this is really important.
It requires that the data that it's searching be sorted.
And so you can only use the binary search algorithm on data that has been sorted.
And so if you want to use it to search an array and the array has not been sorted then you're going
to have to sort the array first and you can use any of the sort of algorithms that we've looked at to
sort the array.
And then you run the binary search on the sorted array.
And that goes for any data structure I'm in if you're want to use binary search on a linked list thing
you have to sort the values in the linked list first.
Now if you know your application is going to be using binary search to do a lot of searches then what
you might consider doing is inserting items into whatever data structure you're using so that they're
always in sorted order.
So rather than sorting the array or whatever you're using every single time you want to run a binary
search if you know you're going to be running a lot of searches and it might be better to just always
make sure that the values in the data structure are always sorted and you can do that when you insert
values.
OK so what is binary search.
Well the way it works and we'll use an array as an example is that it chooses the element in the middle
of the array and it compares it against the search value.
Now if the element in the middle of the array equals the search value we're done right because we found
the value we're looking for.
Now if it doesn't equal the search value then we have more work to do.
So if the element is greater than the search value then we're going to search the left half of the array.
And the reason for that is that the values are sorted and so let's say the middle of the array is an
index 5.
And so we compare the search value against the element at index 5.
Well if that element is greater than the search value then we know that the value we're searching for
has to be in indices 0 to 4 because the data is sorted and so if the value at index 5 is greater than
the value we're searching for that means that the values from indexes 6 up to the end of the array are
going to be greater than the one we're looking for.
So we need to search the left half of the array that's where all the values that are less then the middle
element are located on the other hand if the middle element is less than the value that we're looking
for then we want to search the right half of the array because if if the element array index 5 is less
than the value we're looking for that means all the elements from position 0 to 4 are also going to
be less because the array is sorted and so we know that the value we're looking for has to be at an
index 6 or later on in the array.
And so what we do is we compare the aliment against the middle value and then depending what we find
if the values are equal we're done if they're not we're then going to just focus on the left part of
the array or the right part of the array and then we rinse and repeat we do the same thing.
So if we're going to focus on the left part of the array we take the middle element in that left part
of the array and we compare it against the search value.
If the element in the middle of the left array is greater then we're going to look at the left part
of the left array and if it's less then we're going to look at the right part of the left brain.
We keep doing this dividing each partition up until we're going to end up ultimately either hitting
our search value or we'll end up in the end with getting down to a one element partition and that partition
is going to equal our search value.
So at each step we're dividing the array in half.
It's very similar to what we were doing with Mirch sort.
So at each set repartitioning the array and half until the middle element of the partition we're searching
equals the value we're looking for.
And so because there's a rinse and repeat step we can write binary search recursively.
So let's look at our familiar array and it's sorted.
Because remember you can only use binary search on sorted data.
So the array has been sorted.
Maybe we used merge sort.
Maybe we use quicksort.
Maybe we used insertion sort.
Doesn't matter.
We've sorted the array.
Now let's say we want to find the value 1.
So our star index will be 0 in our end the index will be 7 for the entire array the end index will always
be one greater than the last valid index.
Now we get the midpoint by dividing start plus and by 2.
And so our midpoint our middle element is going to be located at position 3 and then we compare 1 against
7 and 7 is greater than 1.
And so we know that our search value must be located in this area because the array is sorted right.
So if our search value is less than the value here it's not going to be located up here.
Because this array is sorted and so we know that all of the values from four to the end of the array
are equal to or greater than this guy if we compare one against the value at three and the value is
greater We know that one must be located in front of the middle element and so we're now going to look
at the left half of the array.
So our start will be zero and our end will equal the midpoint from here.
And so our end will be three remember the end is always one greater than the partition we want to look
at.
So we're basically saying we're now going to search elements 0 to 2 and we get the new midpoint by adding
start to end and dividing by two.
And so that's three over two.
So our new midpoint is one which is here minus 15 and so we're going to compare one against minus 15.
Now minus 15 is less than 1 and so we know now that the value we're looking for must be in this partition
not in the entire array but in this partition the value we're looking for must be in the right half
of this partition.
And so we're going to search the right half and so our start.
In this case is going to be midpoint plus 1.
So our midpoint before was 1 and so we're going to add 1 to that so our start will be indexed to our
end remains at index 3 and our midpoint is 2 plus 3 which is 5 over 2 which has to basically because
our start is to in our end 3 we haven't a partition of one element.
So it's not surprising that array 2 equals the value we're looking for and we have found our value now
in this example.
We did as many steps as we would have done for linear search.
But if we were looking for a value up here it would have been a lot quicker because we would have come
in and we would have looked at here and said Oh we're looking for 35.
Okay well we're just going to look here now.
And so we skip all of this traversing of the front part of the array.
And so that's binary search it basically starts out by dividing the array down the middle and then it
always looks at the middle element and then depending on what the comparison result is less then greater
than or equal to we've either finished or we're then only going to focus on the left side or the right
side and then we rinse and repeat.
So middle element and then only left side right side etc..
So as I said at some point if you don't find the search value early on at some point eventually you're
going to get down to just one element in the partition and in fact that's what happened in the example
we just went through.
We can implement this recursively and the time complexity is o of log n because we just keep dividing
the array in half.
And remember that will be 0 to the log base to N.
OK so that's how binary search works.
Let's go ahead and implement it.
I'll see you in the next video.